# Representation Polymorphism and Monomorphization

## Introduction

In [[1](#1)], I defined a language that has only the `Int` type.
This makes compilation straightforward because:
- It requires only one stack of `Int`, which is represented by `ListTag` of `IntTag`s.
- The size of each value is statically-known.

However, once polymorphism is introduced to the language, these properties will be lost.
Consider the following polymorphic identity function:

```agda
id⟨A⟩(a : A) : A = a
```

Following the stack semantics in [[1](#1)], we have to push `a` with type `A` to the stack.
Unfortunately, we cannot do this.
Consider the following function calls of `id`:

```agda
let x = id⟨Int⟩(0)
let y = id⟨String⟩("")
```

The polymorphic function `id` is instantiated with `Int` and `String`, and `0` and `""` are passed to it, respectively.
We cannot share the same stack for these calls because the `ListTag` is *monomorphic*, i.e., it can contain tags of the same type only.

In this post, I would like to explore some ways to solve this problem.

## Uniform Representation

A simple solution is to represent all elements uniformly.
We can do this by boxing all the tags in a `ListTag`.
After performing the calls above, the stack will look like:

```agda
[[0], [""]]
```

This seems feasible, but has the following disadvantages:
- Memory overhead due to `ListTag`s for boxing
- Performance overhead due to boxing or unboxing a `ListTag`

For these reasons, I will not adopt the uniform representation into my language or at least make it default.
However, it may be a good idea to box multiple tags in a `ListTag` as the number of boxed tags increases, the impact of the memory overhead decreases.

## Monomorphization

The next solution is to generate specialized copies of each instance of the polymorphic function.
This method is called *monomorphization* or *specialization* in literature.

The example in the introduction is transformed like:

```agda
id⟨Int⟩(a : Int) : Int = a
id⟨String⟩(a : String) : String = a

let x = id⟨Int⟩(0)
let y = id⟨String⟩("")
```

The polymorphic function `id` is copied into two monomorphic functions `id⟨Int⟩` and `id⟨String⟩`.
These functions use the `Int` stack and the `String` stack, respectively.

### Polymorphic Recursion on Types

Consider the following example:

```agda
f⟨A⟩(a : A) : A = let _ = f⟨List A⟩([a]); a

f⟨Int⟩(0)
```

The polymorphic function `f` calls itself with a different instantiation `List A`.
A naive monomorphization does not terminate on this input.
We need to compare and generate a copy modulo erasure.

The erasure function is defined as follows:

```agda
⟦_⟧ : Type → Tag
⟦Int⟧    = IntTag
⟦String⟧ = StringTag
⟦List _⟧ = ListTag
```

Notice that the list of any type is erased to `ListTag`.
The monomorphization terminates at `f⟨ListTag⟩` and generates the following code:

```agda
f⟨IntTag⟩(a : IntTag) : IntTag = let _ = f⟨ListTag⟩([a]); a
f⟨ListTag⟩(a : ListTag) : ListTag = let _ = f⟨ListTag⟩([a]); a

f⟨IntTag⟩(0)
```

### Polymorphic Recursion on Sizes

Consider the following example:

```agda
f⟨A⟩(a : A) : A = let _ = f⟨A, A⟩(a, a); a

f⟨Int⟩(0)
```

where `_, _` is the unboxed tuple type former.
Since `A, B` is unboxed, its size is the size of `A` + the size of `B`.

Because the compiler requires the static size of each type, we cannot monomorphize the code above as before.
We can use polymorphic recursion on types but not sizes.
We have to restrict size polymorphism to let-polymorphism [[2](#2)] so that it can be completely monomorphized.

## Representation-Indexed Types

The size of every type is required both for type checking and compilation.
We store the size in `Type`, which is the type of all types, as in [[3](#3)].
The definition looks like:

```agda
PreType : ℕ → Type
```

If the size in `Type` of a type of the let-bound variable contains free variables, then it will be generalized.
If its instance still has free variables, then it cannot be compiled.
This restriction is analogous to the monomorphic restriction in [[3](#3)].

## Conclusion

We have explored representation polymorphism and monomorphization.
As opposed to [[3](#3)], I believe that monomorphization is an essential part of the compilation, for performance and expressiveness.
However, certain restrictions are necessary for the compiler to terminate.

## References

1. <a id="user-content-1"></a>[**Compiling First-Order Language to Datapack**](https://github.com/intsuc/blog/blob/main/posts/2021-07-02.md)
2. <a id="user-content-2"></a>[Robin Milner. 1978. **A theory of type polymorphism in programming**.](https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0000(78)90014-4)
3. <a id="user-content-3"></a>[Paul Downen, Zena M. Ariola, Simon Peyton Jones, and Richard A. Eisenberg. 2020. **Kinds are calling conventions**. <i>Proc. ACM Program. Lang.</i> 4, ICFP, Article 104 (August 2020), 29 pages.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3408986)
