# <samp>mch</samp>: A Highly-Compatible Lightweight Benchmark Harness for Minecraft

I've released [<samp>mch</samp>](https://github.com/mcenv/mch), a highly-compatible lightweight benchmark harness for Minecraft. It allows us to benchmark idempotent functions while avoiding benchmark pitfalls as much as possible. It is also designed to be as independent of the Minecraft implementation as possible, so it is likely to work as-is with newly released versions of Minecraft.

## How it works?

### Benchmarking

First, let me explain how benchmark pitfalls are avoided. Because the JVM is a very sophisticated and complex runtime system, measuring the time taken to execute a function will introduce intense noise into the benchmark results. To avoid this as much as possible, <samp>mch</samp> performs *warmup* and *JVM forks*.

#### Warmup

Major JVMs perform just-in-time compilation, which collects data on how code is executed at runtime and optimize it based on that data. If you start benchmarking a function immediately, you will be benchmarking an unoptimized function. Also, optimization could be completed during benchmarking, resulting in a sudden decrease in execution time. That reduces the reliability of the benchmark.
Therefore, it is necessary to give the JVM ample opportunity to optimize it fully by executing the function many times before benchmarking. This process is called *warmup*. <samp>mch</samp> performs 5 warmup iterations of 10 seconds each by default. You can change these values via configuration.

#### JVM forks

As mentioned earlier, because JVMs are a very complex system, benchmarking multiple functions on the same JVM instance increases the nondeterministic nature of the benchmark.
To reduce nondeterminism, <samp>mch</samp> launches the Minecraft server 5 times for each function to be benchmarked. You can also change this value via configuration.

### Compatibility

Next, let's discuss how to achieve high compatibility. <samp>mch</samp> injects the code for benchmarking as commands via [brigadier](https://github.com/Mojang/brigadier), the command library used in Minecraft. This approach dramatically reduces the likelihood of code injection breaking in newly released versions of Minecraft. [Java Instrumentation API](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.instrument/java/lang/instrument/package-summary.html) is used for code injection, and [ASM](https://asm.ow2.io/) for code generation.

## Conclusion

That's all for the introduction and explanation of <samp>mch</samp>. If you need help determining which implementation is faster, collect various data with it and examine them.
