# What is the Equivalent of Uniqueness/Linearity for Ordered Types?

## Introduction

Recently, I read an intriguing draft about linearity and uniqueness[^1].
There I found the following insightful statement about ordered types:
> One possibility is that in addition to restricting the structural rules of contraction and weakening, it is also possible to restrict *exchange*, giving ordered type theories which correspond to noncommutative logic. Such systems can be used to model stack-based memory allocation (as opposed to heap-based), since without exchange an object may only be used when it is at the top of the modelled stack. But much like linearity, these systems restrict the use of exchange in the *future*; is there an equivalent of uniqueness for ordered types which provides a guarantee that exchange has never been applied in the *past*, and would such a guarantee be useful for tracking references on the stack?

I thought for a while about what the equivalent of uniqueness for ordered types might be and realized that it might be a guarantee that **a useable variable is at the top of the runtime stack**.

From here on, I will refer to the equivalent of uniqueness/linearity for ordered types as *stackedness/orderedness*.
In the following two sections, I will compare these properties.

## Stackedness

Variables with stackedness have a guarantee that they have never been exchanged in the *past*.
That means that the environment can be viewed identically to the state of the runtime stack for such variables.
Hence, we can guarantee that such a variable available at the top of the environment will also be at the top of the stack at runtime.

Just as we can discard uniqueness and make it unrestricted, we can also discard stackedness.
We can simply forget about the useful information of being at the top of the stack.

## Orderedness

Variables with orderedness have a guarantee that they will never be exchanged in the *future*.
Since such variables may have been exchanged in the past, we can no longer view the environment and the runtime stack identically.
Orderedness just logically restricts the order in which variables are used, but it does not account for their runtime behavior.

Just as we can impose linearity on unrestricted variables, we can also impose orderedness.

## Application to Minecraft

I am not sure how stackedness would be useful for real-world programming, but it is certainly useful for Minecraft-world.
The coincidence of the environment and the runtime stack helps to statically locate the position of the variable in the stack.
That allows for type-safe restricted pass-by-reference.

[^1]: Daniel Marshall, Michael Vollmer, & Dominic Orchard. (2022). [Linearity and Uniqueness: An Entente Cordiale](https://starsandspira.ls/docs/esop22-draft.pdf).
