# Protecting Your System from Players

## Introduction

Not all maps are `allowCommands: false`.
For example, maps could let players enter commands to solve puzzles.
In such maps, players may cheat by directly overwriting the system, e.g., turning on the clear flag as follows:

```mcfunction
data modify storage _ clear set value true
```

In this post, we will discuss how to protect the system of such maps from cheating players.

## Protecting from Chat

Chat messages are `substring`ed to 256 bytes on the server-side.
Therefore, if the namespace of the storage is long enough, players cannot query or modify that storage.

```mcfunction
# Unknown or incomplete command, see below for error
# ...__________<--[HERE]
data modify storage _____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
```

To prevent functions from being executed from chat, we can use pack filters added in 22w11a.

## Protecting from Command Block

If command blocks are enabled, players can edit the command field of a command block to run a command with a length of more than 256 bytes.
In this case, the maximum allowed string length is 32767 bytes, so the rest is the same as above.

## Protecting from Command Leaks

The length of the command of a command block could be longer than 32767 bytes if we copy NBT directly as follows:

```mcfunction
# `leaked_command` is a very long command that unintentionally breaks the system.
data modify block ~ ~ ~ Command set from storage _ leaked_command
```

If we leak commands that allow cheating, players could exploit them.
Fortunately, as of 22w13a, we cannot construct string tags dynamically.
Therefore, we can check all the string tags in datapacks statically so as not to leak critical commands.

## Conclusion

Using very long namespaces makes the system more secure.
Of course, we cannot prevent the world from being overwritten directly, but that is another story.
If it becomes possible to construct string tags dynamically in the future, the above methods will no longer work.
It is essential to keep an eye on future developments.
