# Non-Ad Hoc Canonical Restriction

## Introduction

Consider the following function:

```agda
@external set_random_tick_speed : Int → IO Unit
```

This is an external function which update the gamerule `randomTickSpeed` to a given value.
The compilation roughly looks like:

```agda
⟦set_random_tick_speed 0⟧ = /gamerule randomTickSpeed 0
⟦set_random_tick_speed 1⟧ = /gamerule randomTickSpeed 1
⋮
```

What if the argument is not just an integer constant?
In that case, we can just evaluate the argument:

```agda
  ⟦set_random_tick_speed (1 + 1)⟧
= ⟦set_random_tick_speed 2⟧
= /gamerule randomTickSpeed 2
```

Then, what if the argument has free variables?

```agda
x : Int ⊢ ⟦set_random_tick_speed x⟧       = /gamerule randomTickSpeed ???
x : Int ⊢ ⟦set_random_tick_speed (x + 1)⟧ = /gamerule randomTickSpeed ???
```

Now we are stuck.
We do not know what goes in `???` since `/gamerule randomTickSpeed <value>` requires an integer constant for `<value>`.
This is what I call the *canonical restriction*.

One solution is to evaluate the argument and accept it if and only if its value is in a [*canonical form*](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/canonical+form).
In the cases above, both `x` and `(x + 1)` are in a *neutral form*, whose computation is blocked by a variable, and thus rejected.

However, this solution is ad hoc for the following two reasons:

- Well-typed programs are rejected depending on the syntax forms of evaluated expressions.
- Difficult to know whether an expression will be evaluated at compile-time or not.

In this article, I will explore a type system to enforce the canonical restriction, so that programs that violate the restriction become ill-typed.
This article is heavily influenced by [[1](#1)].

## Two-Level Universes

Let us create two universes.
One is a run-time universe `Type₀` and the other is a compile-time universe `Type₁`.
The terms belonging to the compile-time universe are completely evaluated at compile-time by *staging* [[2](#2)].

As a starter, consider the following simple example:

```agda
let id₁ : Int₁ →₁ Int₁ = λ₁ x₁. x₁ in
$(id₁ 0₁) : Int₀
```

`id₁` is a compile-time function that expects a compile-time integer.
`id₁` is applied to `0₁`, which is an integer constant in the compile-time universe.
Then, the result `0₁` is *spliced* (`$`) into `0₀`, which is an integer constant in the run-time universe.

Note that we do not allow *quote* (`'`), which lifts an expression in the run-time universe into one in the compile-time universe.
If we allow this, we need to consider *cross-stage persistence* [[2](#2)].
In our case, because we cannot persist any variables, we will just perform *canonical form checking* again.

## Inter-Universe Functions

At this point, we just get a useful metaprogramming facility.
To enforce the canonical restriction, we need an *inter-universe function* `A₁ ⇝ B₀`, which receives an object in the compile-time universe and returns an object in the run-time universe.
The compile-time function `A₁ →₁ B₁` does not suffice because it is completely evaluated at compile-time.
What we want to do is to do some work at *run-time* using the *compile-time* values.

Using an inter-universe function, we finally get the proper `set_random_tick_speed`:

```agda
@external set_random_tick_speed : Int₁ ⇝ IO₀ Unit₀
```

We can use this in [*do-notation*](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Haskell/do_notation) as follows:

```agda
do
  _ ← set_random_tick_speed 0₁
  _ ← set_random_tick_speed (1₁ +₁ 1₁)
  _ ← (λ₁ x₁. set_random_tick_speed x₁) 3₁
  _ ← (λ₁ x₁. set_random_tick_speed (x₁ +₁ 1₁)) 3₁
```

## Stage-Polymorphic Functions

Now we can define compile-time functions, run-time functions, and inter-universe functions.
However, a new problem arises here: code reuse.
For example, if we want to use the `id₁` at run-time as well, we have to write the same function in the run-time universe again.

```agda
let id₀ : Int₀ →₀ Int₀ = λ₀ x₀. x₀ in
let id₁ : Int₁ →₁ Int₁ = λ₁ x₁. x₁ in
...
```

Because we intentionally omit *quote*, the isomorphism between `A₀ →₀ B₀` and `A₁ →₁ B₁` cannot be defined.
Furthermore, we do not want `$` to splice `A₁ →₁ B₁` into `A₀ →₀ B₀` as this breaks the property of compile-time functions.
That is where the *stage-polymorphism* comes in.
We can define and use the stage-polymorphic `id` function as follows:

```agda
let id : Intₛ →ₛ Intₛ = λₛ x. x in
refl : $(id 0₁) ≡ id 0₀
```

## Using Different Functions

- `A₁ →₁ B₁` is a compile-time function (e.g. to perform I/O)
- `A₀ →₀ B₀` is a run-time function (e.g. to set a block)
- `Aₛ →ₛ Bₛ` is a stage-polymorphic function (e.g. to perform pure arithmetic)
- `A₁ ⇝ B₀` is an inter-universe function (e.g. to execute a raw command)

We would normally write stage-polymorphic functions in the actual program.

## Conclusion

We have explored how to enforce the canonical restriction without ad hoc canonical form checking.
The two-level universes naturally capture the layers of the JVM (compile-time) and Minecraft (run-time).
We also resolved the code reuse problem between stages by stage-polymorphism.
This would be the basis for practical programming languages for Minecraft, which are not closed under NBTs.

## References

1. <a id="user-content-1"></a>[András Kovács. **Using Two-Level Type Theory for Staged Compilation**](https://github.com/AndrasKovacs/staged/blob/main/types2021/abstract.pdf)
2. <a id="user-content-2"></a>[Walid Taha and Tim Sheard. 1997. **Multi-stage programming with explicit annotations**. SIGPLAN Not. 32, 12 (Dec. 1997), 203–217.](https://doi.org/10.1145/258994.259019)
